Documentation notes for Range field histograms (#46890)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/aggregations/bucket/range-field-note.asciidoc

> [[search-aggregations-bucket-range-field-note]]

Reviewer: You'll need to include this file in `aggregations/bucket.asciidoc`

> === Note on Bucketing Range Fields

Reviewer 2: Hmm, how about "Subtleties of aggregating Range Fields" or something similar?  More of a topic and less of an addendum note vibe?

Reviewer: +1 for 'Aggregating range fields' or something similar.

Also please use sentence case for titles and headings.

==== Documents are counted for each bucket they land in

Since a range represents multiple values, running a bucket aggregation over a

> range field can result in the same document landing in multiple buckets.  This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
range field can result in the same document landing in multiple buckets. This
```

can lead to surprising behavior, such as the sum of bucket counts being higher
than the number of matched documents.  For example, consider this histogram

> over an integer range from 10 to 20: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
over an integer range from `10` to `20`: 
```

[source, console]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT range_index
{
  "settings": {
    "number_of_shards": 2
  },
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "expected_attendees": {
        "type": "integer_range"
      },
      "time_frame": {
        "type": "date_range",
        "format": "yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss||yyyy-MM-dd||epoch_millis"
      }
    }
  }
}

PUT range_index/_doc/1?refresh
{
  "expected_attendees" : {
    "gte" : 10,
    "lte" : 20
  },
  "time_frame" : {

>     "gte" : "2019-10-28 12:00:00",

Reviewer 2: Do we need the time as part of this example?  Might simplify things if we just use dates (and then the mapping can be simplified too).

Also that's my birthday :tada:

Author: Oh far out 🎉 .  I just copied this example from the Range Mapping doc, so it would look familiar.  We don't need times though, so I can drop that.

    "lte" : "2019-11-04"
  }
}
POST /range_index/_search?size=0
{
    "aggs" : {
        "range_histo" : {
            "histogram" : {
                "field" : "expected_attendees",
                "interval" : 5
            }
        }
    }
}
--------------------------------------------------

> Since the interval is 5 (and the offset is 0 by default), we expect buckets 10,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the interval is `5` (and the offset is `0` by default), we expect buckets `10`,
```

> 15, and 20. Our range document will fall in all three of these buckets,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`15`, and `20`. Our range document will fall in all three of these buckets.
```

> something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[source, console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  ...
  "aggregations" : {
    "range_histo" : {
      "buckets" : [
        {
          "key" : 10.0,
          "doc_count" : 1
        },
        {
          "key" : 15.0,
          "doc_count" : 1
        },
        {
          "key" : 20.0,
          "doc_count" : 1
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
--------------------------------------------------

> At present, there is no way for a document to exist partially in a bucket - we

Reviewer 2: I might break this up a bit, something like:

> At present, there is no way for a document to exist partially in a bucket - we
cannot count "one-third" in each of the above three buckets. In this example,
since the document's range overlapped all buckets, it will be included in
the sub-aggregations for each bucket as well.

Author: 👍

> At present, there is no way for a document to exist partially in a bucket - we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A document cannot exist partially in a bucket; For example, the above document
```

> cannot count "one-third" in each of the above three buckets, and if we did a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cannot count as one-third in each of the three buckets. When performing a
```

> sub-aggregation to sum a value over these buckets, the full value would be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sub-aggregation to sum a value over these buckets, the full value of the document would be
```

included in each bucket.

==== Query bounds are not aggregation filters

> A second unexpected behavior can arise when a query is used to filter on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another unexpected behavior can arise when a query is used to filter on the
```

> field being aggregated.  In this case, a document could match the query, but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
field being aggregated. In this case, a document could match the query but
```

still have one or both of the endpoints of the range outside the query.
Consider the following aggregation on the above document:

[source, console]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /range_index/_search?size=0
{
    "query": {
      "range": {
        "time_frame": {
          "gte": "2019-11-01",
          "format": "yyyy-MM-dd"
        }
      }
    }, 
    "aggs" : {
        "november_data" : {
            "date_histogram" : {
                "field" : "time_frame",
                "calendar_interval" : "day"
              }
        }
    }
}
--------------------------------------------------

Even though the query only considers days in November, the aggregation

> generates 8 buckets (4 in October, 4 in November), because the aggregation is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generates 8 buckets (4 in October, 4 in November) because the aggregation is
```

> calculated over the ranges of all matching documents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
calculated over the ranges of all matching documents.
```

[source, console-result]
--------------------------------------------------
{
  ...
  "aggregations" : {
    "november_data" : {
      "buckets" : [
        {

>           "key" : 1572220800000,

Reviewer 2: Maybe toggle on the formatter so we have a `key_as_string` for easier viewing?

Reviewer 2: I'd probably add annotations to the "unexpected" buckets too, to make it clearer.

You can do annotations with `<1>`, `<2>` inline with the JSON.

Then at the bottom of the snippet you can do:

```
--------------------------------------------------
<1> Text for annotation one
<2> Text for annotation two
```

You can also tag multiple things with the same annotation (e.g. multiple lines can be tagged with `<1>` so they are all annotated with the same item)

Author: Found a bug around the format parameter, see #47323, so we won't be doing that for this release.  I'll update the doc when I fix the bug.
